+++
title = "The 3 Forces Guarding Your Dreams:"
description = ""
type = ["posts","post"]
tags = [
    "",
    "",
    "",
    
]
date = "2023-01-09"
series = ["seriesName"]
[ author ]
  name = "Adnan Baig"
+++

## Fear, Pain & Time. 

You have to get past these three forces before you get to your dreams. Once you do though, **everything** you’ve ever dreamed of becomes within your reach. The key?

Disciplined action + Consistency = Forward momentum.

You can’t get consistency without discipline and you can’t become a disciplined person without applying that discipline consistently. Once you have both though, you will start to build forward momentum. The forward momentum that will help you push through your pain and your fears but, it will take time.

Build the foundations first. Discipline, consistency, self control. Plug the holes in your boat because it doesn’t matter how much gold you bring onto your boat if it full of holes you’re keeping nothing and going nowhere.

Build habits and processes to get you working towards your goals and then focus on those habits instead of the goals. The goals tell you which direction to steer the boat in but the habits are the oars. This isn’t a sailboat. It’s a row boat and you have to row everyday to get home to your dream life.

It’s the things we do everyday that add up to the ‘overnight success’ people see ten years down the line. The only way to get to where you want to be is to go there yourself.


## "Hard choices, easy life. Easy choices, hard life." - Jerzy Gregorek

There are two paths you can take. One makes life harder. One makes life easier:

1. You can do what's inside of your comfort zone all the time and never step out of it. This will quickly make you weaker and life progressivly harder and harder to deal with.

2. You can begin to step outside of that comfort zone and do things each day that push you through stress, pain and fear. This will very quickly make you stronger and life no matter how many spanners are thrown in the works, will progressivley get easier and easier to deal with.

You don't have to go crazy. It could be a simple as taking cold showers or getting up early every day and working out. It could be trying new food when you go out for dinner.





---


Thanks for reading this article! Hopefully you enjoyed reading it or at least found it interesting or helpful. If you'd like to read more articles like this feel free to follow me on twitter using the links on [the homepage](https://baigelbytes.netlify.app) or below.

If you'd like to support my work feel free to share my posts or website on social media. If there's a topic you'd like me to consider feel free to email me at baigelbytes1@gmail.com


[*Twitter:* https://twitter.com/baigelbytes](https://twitter.com/BaigelBytes)
