+++
title = "Why I stopped identifying with religion and spirituality, but still take an interest in them as an outsider."
description = ""
type = ["posts","post"]
tags = [
    "Religion",
    "Spirituality",
    "Mental Health",
    
]
date = "2021-09-27"
series = ["seriesName"]
[ author ]
  name = "Adnan Baig"
+++

## Introduction:

*Firstly, let me apologise in advance about the length of this post. If you're reading this on a mobile device it might end up feeling like a book but hopefully you're here because you like reading in which case I hope you find this post entertaining, informative and enjoyable :)*

I was raised in a Muslim family, for the majority of my childhood and the entirety of my teenage years, by my grandparents. As a young child, my grandprents enrolled me into a Quran class on the weekends (something akin to sunday school for christian children).

Each saturday and sunday morning I would go to a mosque or to a religious teachers house to learn about the Quran and Islam. There would be classes there where we were taught how to read the Quran, how to follow the religion of Islam and how to perform acts of worship.

Sometime I found these interesting like when they would talk about the history of the religion or the Prophet Muhammad and his companions. Other times not so much. I think at least for me it was harder to take an interest in reading text I couldn't understand. Also, being a child, often, I just wanted to play with friends.


## Current philosophies and outlooks on life.

### I believe in an afterlife, but not the one you're thinking of.

Religions often have within them notions of life after death. Where, once someone dies in this world, depending on how they lived their life they may go to one of two (at least in the abrahamic religions) places, heaven or hell. This is one of the core aspects of many faiths and somthing which affects the attitudes, perspectives and day to day actions of the people who follow those faiths.

People want to be and do good both because it benefits others and because it earns them the favour of God in the hereafter. Well, I too, currently an atheist/agnostic ( & maybe slightly deistic), believe in an after life. Not the same one that religious people believe in however.

I believe that after I die, the world will still exist, and the people that are alive then will be going through the same struggles and facing the same challenges in life that I and others like me did in my time. I believe that this is something that could be proven matter of factly by the fact that countless other people around the world have and are dying all the time.

Therefore, personally, I consider this afterlife to be of a higher priority to me than the afterlife defined in religions. Of course if I'm wrong then I'm probably going to regret it after I die (not just  probably, if I am in fact wrong!). I don't know, matter of factly whether or not any of the after lives found in religion are true but I can say with that the probability of the world existing after I die is as close to certain as a probability can get. Close enough that it would not be a foolish thing to simply assume this will be the case.

So, to me, the most important thing is to live in a way that benefits the highest possible number of people not only during my life but also after it.

This is not something I can simply begin doing overnight but it is something I can start to work on right now. In fact, that's actually what I'm trying to do with my life coaching and this blog, though the blog is also for entertainment purposes.

I'm still figuring out the best ways for me to do that whilst balancing everything else in my life as I'm obviously, only human, so there is definitely an upper limit to what I can do.

This point on balance brings me to one of the main reasons why these days, I prefer to only take interest in religion and spirituality as an outside observer, without making them a part of my identity because when I was religious and spiritual it affected my mental health (more than once) to the point where I was hardly able to function and contribute to society.


## Mental Health:

As I mentioned, the main reason why I decided to move away from religion and spirituality or at least stop identifying with them was how they affected my mental health, but let me elaborate. I wasn't just in a happy spiritual state where I constantly walked around smiling and at peace like some enlightened mystic fully in control of their mind. Far from it!...


### Do Little, without the doctorate.

I was by all accounts, out of my mind. At my worst, I was having full blown two way conversations with inanimate objects like lamp posts and doors! They spoke back to me telepathically, or at least that's what I thought at the time. How I rationalised this was by thinking about the fundamental nature of reality. I also used to talk to animals although I still do that now, I don't think they talk back to me telepathically.

I used to tell people: "Look at what we're made of. Basically there is no difference between me and this table. Break me down what do you get? Organs. Break those down what do you get? Cells. Break those down what do you get? Molecules, then atoms then subatomic particles. Now do the same thing for a table. Break it down and what do you get? Molecules, atoms and subatatomic particles. If we're made of the same stuff then what's the difference?"

This view of the world might be harmless in some contexts like in a philosophical conversation in the comfort of an arm chair for example; but to actually think it true without any evidence beyond personal subjective experience (my hearing the replies of inanimate objects in my head) is actually potentially dangerous.

What if one of these voices tried to convince me to cause harm to myself or someone else? They didn't, but aside from that there were also times when I thought I could hear God speaking to me, and there where times when this resulted in events that only served to strengthen my faith.


## Understanding the emotions that drive people of faith:

Religion and spirituality can and often do provide extremely vivid and powerfull life changing experiences for people both positive and negative. I have had multiple experiences on both ends of the spectrum and I don't think it would be fair to talk about why I left religion and spirituality without talking about some of the positive experiences it gave me.

Knowing this it's no wonder that religion is so popular for so many people of the world. Religion really can have an immensly positive impact on peoples lives and the world however it comes down to how it is interpreted and practiced but then the same could be said for any system religious or not.

Some of the most positive experiences I've ever had in my life can be attributed to religion and spirituality! Here are just a few examples...


### Offering crisps to strangers. People of the book.

Somewhere around I think 2016/17 or maybe earlier, I was exploring multiple religions and trying to start a charity that enabled people of all faiths and none to learn about each other without the biased filters of mainstream media. It was going to be a website called People Of The Book and had two main purposes.

1. As mentioned to allow people of all faiths and none to learn about each other without the  media bias, in order to cultivate peacfull relationships and by extention, hopefully, a more peacfull world.
2. To provide a space where anyone could raise money for charities by creating artwork, music, poetry or anything they liked, to sell on the website where they could choose a charity that a percentage of each sale would go to. This would enable people to follow their passions and provide for themselves, while simultaneously helping others.

I was also trying to get better at making music in order to be able to perform publically to raise money for the project as I was passionate about music at the time and thought it was a good way to follow my passion whilst simultaneously helping others. This was the inspiration for the second point I listed above.

So, at this time I was going around looking for people from different faiths so that I could learn about their faiths through participation. I went to a sunday service at a salvation army church and had many discussions with my hindu flat mate, I went to a buddhist meditation center and wherever I could not or didn't know of a way to participate in the communities of a religion I would simply do research online.

One day I was riding home after doing my shopping and noticed some people in the carpark I thought nothing of it and just assumed they were people that lived in the building but as I got to the door to the building I heard God speak to me.

Included in my shopping was a 30pack of walkers crisps and God said to me "Offer them some crisps." I was perplexed. Offer them some crisps? I thought. "but I don't even know them" I replied. "Just do it. Trust me" said God. "what about my bike?" I replied before realising God will look after it.

So, inspired by God I grabbed the multipack of crisps and left the rest of my shopping and my bike (anyone who knows me knows just how much BMX meant to me back then!) at the entrance to the flats and proceeded to carry this giant multipack of crisps to three complete strangers in the middle of my buildings carpark to, at Gods request, offer them some crisps.

"Hi, sorry but errm.... wou... would you like some crisps?" I asked nervously. I could see the confusion in their faces before they politely declined my offer. They were understandably as perplexed as I was when God first asked me to do it.

"Oh, err.. o.. ok." I said before I started to walk away but as soon as the first step back I again heard God's voice  this time say "Ask them if they're christian." so I did.

"Yes off course!", the lady replied, "He's the pastor of a church", she said, pointing to the man she was speaking with.

Immidietly I bursed into tears and explained what was going on, "I was just coming home with my shopping and then God told me to offer you crisps!" I blurted out while crying perfusely like a two year old; "I was like, what do you mean offer them crisps? I don't even know who they are!?"

They were as shocked as I was, "You actually listened!" replied the woman. "So many people hear God but they don't listen!" She continued.

We then got talking about each others lives and I told her about the website I was working on and the fact that I wanted to raise money for charities and to help people in need using my music and then, shocked she said, almost bursting into tears herself...

"Oh my God, I was just talking to my pastor about my own struggles, I needed help for a charity that helps children in africa and I was really struggling to find the money I needed! We held a long prayer session and I was worrying about where I could possibly find the money but the pastor kept saying, don't worry sister, have faith! God will provide, the money will come!"

I was completely awestruck! Reduced & humbled to nothingness at the sight of the miricle I had just witnessed! How could this not be God at work? I just couldn't see any other possibility at the time. Here we were, one person trying to raise money through music to help people in need and another person also trying to help people in need but strugling to find the funds.

And we were brought together by a voice in my head that I at the time believed to be God.

Obviously as a person of faith, I took this as a sign which in turn strengthened my faith in God a thousand, million, MILLION times over!


## Some more of the most powerfull spiritual experiences I've ever had:

There were many experiences I had over the course of multiple spiritual journeys in my life that I would have at the time attributed to the supernatural. Not without exception however, as one of these experiences was at a time when I was exploring and experimenting with Buddhism...


### Death before death, the one time in my life my mind was truly completely empty. Or as close to it as possible.

I was in a Buddhist phase, exploring philosophy and the effects of meditation and as any normal 17 year old would do, seeking spiritual enlightenment. Well, I actually did have an experience that led me to believe at the time that I had attained my goal. It was in the garden at my grandparents house where I lived at the time. I would sometimes get up early before work to practice meditation as well as stretching and my own substandard forms of tai chi, based not on any actual tai chi text books or manuals but simply on what felt good at the time.

After some sudo tai chi and some stretching I sat down in a kneeling positon and stretched some more before settling into my meditation. It began like most meditations do, with a focus on my breathing and observing my thoughts without interfering with them. Simply watching my thoughts go by in my mind like a person watching a theatre show.

In fact, that's exactly how they began to appear after a while. My thoughts were being displayed inside my mind like photos hovering above a wooden stage with red velvety curtains. One after the other they came and went and my emotions began to dissapear. I was now looking at these memories and thoughts with a kind of curiosity you might expect from someone visiting a tourist atraction in a foreign land. Admiring their asthetics but not realy able to identify with them on a personal level.

Then, eventually, these thoughts and memories started to dissapear until there was nothing left but the awareness of myself and that I was still in my Grandparents garden. My eyes had been shut for a while now though I couldn't say for sure, how long. And then, even the awareness of the fact that I was in my Grandads garden began to dissapear. But it didn't stop there.

Eventually I began to lose the awareness of my body and then my language, then finally, even my awareness of self dissapeared. There was no longer any sensation of I. No self to be aware of. 

Experience itself was reduced to a literal (as literal as possible at least) nothingness. Just sheer nothingness, no light, no fear, no peace. Nothing at all execpt perhaps the tiniest, faintest whispers of curiosity.

After a while like this I began to return. Slowly, ever so slowly. First to return was the awareness of self. But this came without any knowlage of language so I did not know to think, 'this is me'. The words simply did not exist in my mind. But eventually I began to regain an awareness of my body, then of the garden I was in, still no language though.

I could hear the birds singing in the trees and feel the fresh morning air, a sheer overwhelming sense of peace came over me, to an extent that I had never felt before in my life! As I opened my eyes and looked around the garden, language began, noun by noun, returning to me as I focused my attention on the different things around me.

I looked at the trees and tried to find the birds in them, "trees" I said to myself in my head, "birds". I looked down at myself, "hands... legs... grass... spiders" I looked over at a small tree next to me and saw ants crawling up and down its trunk, "ants" I said with the curious enthusiasm of a child learning the words for the first time. Indeed, that was exactly how it felt; like I was experienceing existance for the very first time. As if I had just then been born into the world and the names of things were being placed into my head simply puffing into existance out of nowhere.

Over the next few days, weeks and months so many epiphanys, opinions and thoughts I considered to be wisdom entered my mind I that described it as being like trying to empty a cup of water at the bottom of an ocean. There was simply too much knowlage and too many ideas coming into my head for me to ever possibly know what to do with them beyond writing them down or sharing them with family and friends.


## Surrounded by light, enveloped by love, my Islamic OBE:

Somewhere around 2013 during a time when I was a devout Muslim I used to go to what I think might have been a kind of sufi or sufi/sunni mosque near my parents house where I was living at the time. I loved to pray and worship and as I was also experiencing domestic abuse at the time I was spending more and more time at the mosque which was unfortunately making my non Muslim Dad more and more stressed out, which made him more violent which made me go to the mosque more to avoid him.

One day I was at the the mosque, after saying my prayers I was praising God in prostration because this usually made me feel better and got rid of some of my negative emotions and helped me cope with the abuse I was getting at home. This time though, something different happened. It's the only time it's ever happened to me.

There I was prostrating to God in the mosque and as I was reciting his names over and over again I began to feel distant from my body and the room. I could hear less and less of what was going on in the room around me and I had my eyes closed but instead of darkness I began to see light. It got brighter and brighter and it was all around me but I could barely feel my body by this point.

This only made be praise God more as I felt I was being brought closer to him and as I did my voice seemed to sound more and more distant. I was completely surrounded by light, I could still hear my voice in the distance and had a vague awareness of my body though it too felt more distant.

And in all this light all I could feel was love. Sheer, boundless, limitless, endless, infinite, eternal, overwhelming, reduce a person to tears of sheer humility, love! If I had died then and there I would have been the happiest person in history! However that was not Gods plan.

Just writing this now is almost reducing me to tears. This is how much religion and spirituality affect peoples emotions even years after they leave them.


## This is why people of faith feel so strongly about their faiths!

It's precicely because of experiences like these I think that people of faith have such strongly held beliefs and consider their faith to be something more, something deeper than anything tangible or quantifiable by science. The emotions that such experiences invoke are just so extreemely powerful that most people can think of no other cause than supernatural ones. This is what I believe underpins the conviction with which people of faith hold onto their beliefs.

It's such a powerful, viceral, life changing experience that it's very hard to convince someone that there could be any other explination for it than a supernatural one.

But holding such beliefs and considering them to be literally true without ever questioning them can **in some cases** actually cause harm to people. If not the the people holding the beliefs then to others they interact with. It can very quickly become a dangerous thing when someone thinks they can hear the voice of God and know his intentions.

This is just how a lot of cults are formed; by people thinking they either know Gods intentions or that they themselves are God. I didn't think I was God but I did at times think I knew his intentions and as I've already mentioned, there were times when I heard a voice in my head that I thought was God.


## Why I left Religion and whats keeping me from returning to it:

Islam was the religion I was raised to believe in. It's the main religion of my family and so it's the religion I have the deepest connection with and this is why, when talking about religion I will often cover Islam in more detail unless I'm specifically talking about another religion.

I've already mentioned my mental health issues which were a big part of why I felt I had to leave religion behind, I would say it was 50% of the reason. The other 50% was through discovering my sexuality.

Around 2016 I discovered I was not as I previously thought, bisexual but actually homosexual. This raised some issues with my faith as I felt and still feel that Islam was and still is against homosexuality along with any other sexual orientations other than heterosexuality.

At least when I thought I was bisexual I could simply try to ignore or hide any feelings towards men and focus instead on women but once I realised I was actually gay it was no longer so simple.

Now I had a choice to make. I tried to reconsile my faith with my sexuality but failed every time. I also tried out different faiths like Christianity, and for a brief period I even explored Rastafarianism & Hinduism but they all either affected my mental health or I would find that they were against homosexuality.

I would have to choose between the two. However, the science is also very clear on this subject. Homosexuality is no more a choice than heterosexuality but when you follow a system that you're not allowed to question it makes embracing facts like these a lot harder as a community and people suffer as a result.

Therefore, I had no choice but to leave Islam. Also, seeing gays get executed publicall in saudi arabia didn't help. I even once saw a video of someone publically decapitated by sword in Saudi Arabia. This, cemented the idea in my head that I would not be able to reconcile my sexuality with religion and as my sexuality is not a choice, I had no option but to leave. 

Perhaps I could have tried to ignore my sexuality and follow religion but really that would as it does for many people only lead to depression as I would be surpressing a fundamental aspect of my identity. Try to imagine what this would be like if religious people were made to do the same with their religious identities.

In fact, we unfortunately live in a time where we don't need to imagine this. Look at Frances Burka ban. This is in my opinion a violation of peoples human rights as I mentioned in [a previous article]([https://baigelbytes.github.io/lifecoachbaig/blog/religiousidentity/](https://baigelbytes.github.io/lifecoachbaig/blog/religiousidentity/)) on religion, and multiple times in this article, freedoms must be given to all not just some. People should be allowed to wear whatever they like and if a woman, Muslim, Catholic, Hindu, Sikh, Non-Religious or otherwise wants to cover her hair then let her. She is causing no ham by doing this.

However the same goes the other way, religions and religiously conservative nations should also not try to force people to wear headscarfs. It should be the choice of the individuals. Not the governments, not the husbands, brothers or fathers but each individual womans.


## Where I'm going from here:

I still have a great deal of interest in religion and spirituality but as I have goals that require me to operate at 100% mental capacity I can't risk diving into them in the same way I did previously. I want to contribute positively to society to the absolute maximum capacity I possibly can whilst maintaing a balance of good personal physical and mental health.

I'm still trying to learn about religion and spirituality and I would still lke to learn many different languages including Arabic, Hebrew, Aramaic, Greek and Latin to be able to read and more importantly understand, the Abrahamic religious texts in their origional languages (I'll also learn to read and understand other religious texts over time from Hinduism, Sikhism, Buddhism etc).

My priorities however, no longer relate to finding any kind of ultimate truth to life as that may well be impossible. Instead I simply want to maximise my own health and learn as much as I can for the short blip of existance I've been blessed with on the earth and pass on anything I find that is helpfull to anyone who it might help.

This blog is one way which I'm trying to do just that. To help myself and others simultaneously. Life coaching is another and I also have other projects that I'm planning on doing as well which I will reveal in due course.




---

Thanks for reading this article! Hopefully you enjoyed reading it or at least found it interesting. If you'd like to read more articles like this feel free to follow me on social media using the links on [the homepage](https://baigelbytes.github.io/lifecoachbaig/) or below.

I'm trying to turn this into a full time career. If you'd like to support my work and help me reach that goal, head to my [support me](https://baigelbytes.github.io/lifecoachbaig/supportme/) page to see how you could do just that.

There's no preassure to do so however. If all you do is read my articles that's fine and if you find them informative, entertaining or helpfull please feel free to share them as much as you like! :)


[Life coaching page](https://baigelbytes.github.io/lifecoachbaig/lifecoaching/)

[Facebook](https://www.facebook.com/adnan.baig.73)

[Instagram](https://www.instagram.com/adnanbaig601/)

[Twitter](https://twitter.com/adnanbaig601)

