+++
title = "Workouts For People Who Don't Like Gyms"
description = ""
type = ["posts","post"]
tags = [
    "tag1",
    "tag2",
    "tag3",
    
]
date = "2023-01-02"
series = ["seriesName"]
[ author ]
  name = "Adnan Baig"
+++

## Pay for weights or make your own?

I



## Push Pull

That's the basic movment types



## Cardio, Why pay for the gym when you can get paid by the gym.

Cyclist? Guess what. I think you know what I'm going to say. Yep, Uber Eats! No, I don't mean order a pizza! WAIT!! Come out of that app and download the uber driver app. Or sign up for Deliveroo or Just Eat or any of the other alternatives. Buy the bag and start cycling.

Here's the perspective.

You could, sign up to a gym and pay to do cardio or lift weights. OR yo could by/make your own weights for free and then GET PAID to do cardio. Even if you only make a few pounds it's money in not money out and if you make nothing?

You're still working out and getting fitter.

Don't look at this as a full time carrer or even a source of incoe because I did Uber Eats full time for a wile and made about £200-£300 a month and sometimes I worked from 11am to 3am the next day, AND that was in London!

It's not a source of income compareable to a job or even most side hustles but if instead of paying a gym membership your cardio paid for your phone bill, your netflix subscription and some of your food or toiletries each month aren't you better off?


---


Thanks for reading this article! Hopefully you enjoyed reading it or at least found it interesting or helpful. If you'd like to read more articles like this feel free to follow me on twitter using the links on [the homepage](https://baigelbytes.netlify.app) or below.

If you'd like to support my work feel free to share my posts or website on social media. If there's a topic you'd like me to consider feel free to email me at baigelbytes1@gmail.com


[*Twitter:* https://twitter.com/baigelbytes](https://twitter.com/BaigelBytes)
